---
layout: page
title: Why <i>Road to Serfdom</i> changed my mind
---

## Prior to reading

I was only familiar with Hayek as an important figure in the Austrian school of
economics who enjoyed strong affection among right- and libertarian-leaning
thinkers in American politics. I had been told that *Road to Serfdom* formed a
major pillar of the conservative critique of Big Government, heavy-handed
industrial policy, and interventionist public policy in general. I had also
listened to Grover Norquist (not exactly a nuanced political activist) give a
strong endorsement of the book on a podcast.

I suspected that *Road to Serfdom* would be a tirade against the evils of
"government" and that Hayek would come across as a polemicist.  With the
reputation it has garnered in contemporary politics, together with its
provocative title, I was effectively primed against generosity towards Hayek,
and I strongly doubted that I would learn anything useful from the book.

## The book 

The first aspect of Hayek's argument that forced me to reconsider my priors
emerges in the Introduction itself: *Road to Serfdom* is not primarily concerned
about the welfare state. There, and throughout the book, Hayek is at great pains
to stress that the implementation of progressive taxes and other redistributive
policies need not overlap with the kind of state interventions that worry him.
At one point he even suggests that "demand management" -- countercyclical public
spending, as Keynes advocated -- is not inconsistent with his conception of a
liberal state. These can all exist comfortably, subject to particular (but
important) constraints, in a free society.

Rather, Hayek's concern lies in "planning," a catch-all term for public
interference in markets. In the early 1940s, the British intellectual zeitgeist
accepted as *a priori* the superiority of Soviet and Nazi-style state controls
on commerce and expression. This was supported by good-faith assessments of
recent history. The previous 20 years saw the corrupting hubris of financial
speculation and the debilitating chaos of Depression and solvency crises. While
America and Britain generally avoided the worst totalitarian impulses that
emerged in the Depression's wake, nor had they satisfactorily escaped them, and
it seemed that Nazi Germany and the USSR, both having adopted significant state
controls over social and industrial policy, had accomplished substantive
recoveries. The extent to which ineffectual fiscal and monetary policy
determined the economic trajectories of the remaining democratic countries of
that era was still unknown. To the reasonable observer, it appeared instead that
the failures of the capitalist system were categorical rather than conditional,
whose solutions required the adoption of radically collectivist approaches to
organizing the state and society.

Moreover, economics as a profession, which had only recently begun to apply
mathematical formalism to its theory, used a constructed (benevolent) social
planner with which to decide the allocation of capital and labor in the
macroeconomy. The contemporary political motivation for this was clear, and
despite the broad acceptance of the major results of microeconomics (such as the
welfare theorems) that recommended policies of noninterference, many economists
sought to syncretize democratic and liberal values with the strengths of
centralized planning.

Hayek understood this project to be impossible. Without doubting the sincerity
of his colleagues (and friends) in their commitment to democracy, he suggested
that they would find the actions needed to establish the planning on their
desired scale totally unacceptable:

> That democratic socialism, the great utopia of the last few generations, is
> not only unachievable, but that to strive for it produces something so utterly
> different that few of those who wish it would be prepared to accept the
> consequences, many will not believe until the connection has been laid bare in
> all its aspects.

The path from the liberal systems in America and Britain to the planned
societies imagined by his colleagues is Hayek's road to serfdom. The arc of the
book details the contradictions Hayek identifies between liberalism and
planning, and how Hayek understands the eventual erosion of individual rights
and political constraints by the planners to achieve their goals. Majority-rule
necessitates rule-by-committee; planning powers require centralized powers;
opposition constituencies -- political, cultural, even scientific -- are
obstacles to the goals of the collective. To Hayek, the more one accepts the
logic of planning, the less one can tolerate the ethos of liberalism.

Importantly, the critique that Hayek offers here is methodological and
structural: the state of serfdom is the necessary consequence to planning. As a
critique, it is emphatically agnostic to the value of the desired ends of
planning. If those ends be accomplished without compromising the liberal
components of a free society, then Hayek offers no condemnation. A genuine
sensitivity to the argument of *Road to Serfdom* is perfectly consistent with,
for example, the desire to eradicate poverty *and* to use the levers of public
policy to do so. When Hayek does make value judgments, as when he states his
preference for regulation of a natural monopoly rather than the alternative of a
purely public ownership, he is careful to frame these as subject to empirical
"facts on the ground" and admits that liberals need not side one way or the
other to be consistent with the book's main thrust.

The resulting picture does indeed provide hard limits to the scope of state
power but leaves significant opportunities for public policy to achieve social
objectives without approaching these limits. As he repeats throughout, societies
responsible for improving the welfare of its members can (and should) be pursued
without engaging in the planning that detriments all.

## After reading

Hayek emerges from *Road to Serfdom* far more sympathetically than I
anticipated. Whether I believe in the *necessity* of illiberalism as a product
of  planning as Hayek does is not crucial to my sensitivity to his overall
argument.  The case against planning was certainly strongest in the immediate
aftermath of 1945, but in Britain and America many forms of planning, from
industrial policy to nationalized industries, did emerge in the postwar
environment. It reached a zenith immediately prior to the advent of Thatcherism
and Reaganomics, and at the time, the intellectual impetus for these movements
certainly included Hayek's critique of planning. 

I am more familiar with the aftermath of the crude liberalizations and
deregulation of the era of Reagan and Thatcher than I am with the planning zeal
of the postwar era. The fact that Thatcher gave no thought to the pain induced
by her industrial privatizations, or the fact that the Reagan administration
took a hacksaw approach to deregulate the financial industry, need not diminish
the strength of the Hayekian case for reform in 1980. We live in a world in
which the consequences of careless liberalizations are evident, but we don't
observe the counterfactual world that slogged along without them. Hayek himself
fought against what he perceived to be the inevitable tide of Nazism and Soviet
Communism, whose apparent merits had become foregone conclusions by 1944.

It's not clear to me that we would presently live in totalitarian serfdom
without the reforms of Thatcher and Reagan, but Hayek helps me to better
appreciate the weight of that alternative.

In the end, Hayek surprised me by maintaining a restrained critique of socialism
and planning, sympathising with the general goals of the democratic socialists
of his generation while opposing their methods. From the vantage of *Road to
Serfdom*, at least, Hayek's case is eminently reasonable: if one values both
liberalism and social welfare, then the design of public policy and vigilance
towards the corrosive power of state overreach take on utmost importance. 

I honestly struggle to understand the support he receives from his admirers.
*Road to Serfdom*, at least, never advocates for libertarianism, and has nothing
to say about the general tax rates of a country. But I suppose these are not
inconsistent with the ethos of the book either.  Did Hayek preserve the nuance
of his book in himself? I honestly don't know, though some suggest not. He would
probably take issue with parts of my center-left reading of his work. Then
again, I wonder how his thinking would have evolved from the 2008 financial
crisis, the aftermath of which has not seen the rise of totalitarian
alternatives like those which haunted Hayek in 1944.

Now that Reagan's grip on the intellectual core of the American right is fading,
his successor would do well to heed the dedication of *Road to Serfdom*: "To the
socialists of all parties." The ugly illiberalism of planning is apparent not
just when applied to industrial policy but, as we continue to discover, in
immigration policy, too.  Frequently, Hayek appears prescient to the modern
moment, but as a critique of present-day American conservatism as much as
left-wing socialism. In all, the book contains real insights into the essential
nature of planning, along with the dangers latent inside it. Its critique is
worth understanding, whether the inevitability of serfdom it fears is as clear
as Hayek maintains.
